There's an important topic that
we haven't talked about yet,
that is pretty important to
most frameworks these days.
And that's global state management for
that.
Everything we've been doing right now
has been encapsulated into our various
components.
So for example, one of the reasons why I
have the restaurant page you see here has
all the data.
And then I have this new restaurant
form that is a subset and
then being like sort of toggle back and
forth.
Is because at least prior just talking
about state management it's very tricky to
pass data around or
components like that, right, so
ideally I would create another route.
And then that would share
something in the global state,
that's what we would ideally like to see.
So what we're gonna do is we're gonna
show you how to basically do some state
management with TypeScript with
the new library called Pinia.
So if you haven't seen this
cute little pineapple,
this is the mascot for
our global state management.
And if you're wondering like,
what about view x?
Well, view x is ultimately, I think,
basically going to be deprecated and
Pinia is now the official
state management solution.
So Pinia Lite V3 is built from
the bottom up with TypeScript, so
it's designed to be really
easy to use with it, actually.
So what we're gonna do is we're
gonna assume that basically people,
this first time that
people are using Pinia and
then we're just gonna sort of augment
types as like as we did before.
So the thing about Pinia, as far as like,
I think state management in general,
is that in the past few years you
used to have to opt into modularity.
You have to be like, okay, like most
people start out with this global store
and then over time, you broke that up into
smaller pieces that then could be chucked
when it loaded on a certain page.
You didn't load your entire global
state on every single page.
And that's kind of like the progress, but
then I think at some point people realize,
wait, I think we just want modular
by default it's kinda silly to
go the other direction to like,
import everything at once.
So Pinia follows that exact convention.
So first thing first is inside of our
stores directory currently empty.
Let me make sure I'm on the right branch,
I am great.
We're just gonna create a new file, and
I use Pascal case for naming the stores,
just because they're kinda
the constants the way I see them.
So I'm gonna do RestaurantStore.ts,
so I'm gonna do.
Okay, now that we have this,
what do we need to do?
Well, we're going to import
a define store helper from Pinia.
So this is back to our composable
discussion that we've been talking about
where we have a lot of helper functions
to help us do the view like things, but
in a declarative way that
people would understand.
So now that we have this defined store,
what can we do?
Well, so we can define a constant.
And what are we gonna call it?
So it's a composable that's
gonna call upon the store.
So the use keyword is gonna be used here.
So use RestaurantStore is
gonna be what this is called.
And then we're gonna
call define store here.
So this kinda like defined
component if you think about it,
now you're defining a component.
Now you're defining a store,
and so what am I gonna call it?
I'm just gonna call it exactly what
it's called, which is RestaurantStore.
So I usually map the, this is the idea
of the source essentially, and
I map it directly to the file name,
so that's why I name it this way.
Casing is up to you, of course,
now, with that said,
now we have an object that we passed
that is gonna consist of our stores.
So typically in most state management like
Redux and stuff you have your state, you
have your getters, which are essentially
your computer properties in view, and
then you have actions.
And then you have mutations, right,
that's like your standard Redux pattern.
But what I'm happy to tell you is
that with Penia, mutations disappear,
no more boilerplate of like, call
an action to then define a mutation to
basically do the same thing, that's all.
We've taken care of that for
you, it's all good now.
So what this ultimately means is that
to map it over to what we talked about
before, this is essentially our
data object from options API.
This is our computed and this is our
methods, basically what's happening.
So first thing first, let's go ahead and
then have a list of data.
So to refactor this, I'm gonna teach
here to do or restaurant page.
And I'm gonna take all of this out.
Okay, we're gonna x name that.
And then actually I'll leave
it as an empty array, so
that it doesn't yell at me.
And then we're gonna drop it inside
of our restaurants store, okay?
Lots and lots of yelling.
Why is it yelling at me?
Use store function that
retrieves the store instance.
Silly me, I forgot.
State, in case you ever
doing this in the past,
you could define your state
just as like an empty object.
But it's actually just like most
reactivity system, it needs to be
a function that calls an object, so that
it's always getting its latest instance.
So once I turn this into the arrow
function that returns an object
that contains the state, there you go,
now it is much happier with me.
And so again, something that Tyffyn
kinda helped me out with this because
I would have just barreled ahead otherwise
without that huge red squiggly line, okay,
this looks much prettier.
So now that we have this,
of course, the question is, okay,
how do we actually call the thing?
So let's go ahead and
inside of our restaurant page.
We can go ahead now and import our
composable use restaurant store and
so what this is again what we're doing
is we're basically setting it up.
So what I can do here is I can say const
restaurantStore = useRestaurantStore.
And so this now has a direct correlation
to that store module that we're
importing on this file.
And this is something that I personally
have really come to like about using
Pinia versus like view x where you
just have this.dollar sign store.
And you just have to assume things are
aware and then you have to name things.
This I just name it whatever that makes
sense to me, which is restaurantsStore,
use restaurantsStore I think most
people can follow along this.
And then from here, believe it or
not let me lock restaurant store for
us to see what we're getting,
there you go great, other way, all right?
So if I go to restaurants,
nothing's here, but that makes sense.
You'll notice that inside of our proxy
we have basically everything here,
there's the list.
There's our list of all the things
that we have inside of here.
Which means no longer do you have to go
like, store.state dot this or whatever.
The ergonomics are there so that we can
basically now say, restaurantStore.list.
And so now if we refresh this and take a
look, look, there's our proxy with all our
events or the or sorry,
all of our restaurants that we want.
So really if we think about it,
what we could do is we could
just say that restaurantLists,
we can just actually just
do restaurantStore.List.
And then cannot find any
in our restaurant store,
I think that was a weird compiler bug,
[LAUGH] okay?
And so again, what's nice though, is that
now that you're actually in this proxy
reactive like environment,
all the values actually just disappear.
Filter text is fine.
So restaurant list filter this is great,
but it's yelling at us.
Why?
Because right now we don't have any types,
this actually does make sense.
Because, again,
we've defined it, we've used it,
but how do we tell Pinia that
we have a list of restaurants?
Well, exactly just like we did before.
I would just call it state shape and
then I'm gonna say that, hey,
the list is a list of restaurants,
an array.
And then when the object is returned,
what am I expecting?
StageShape.
So now that I have that,
when I go back to restaurant page,
you'll notice all the squiggly
lines have disappeared.
And more importantly,
I don't need value anymore, and that's it.
I've now brought everything in, so
let's continue on this refactor as well.
So we have the ability to see
the lists and all that stuff.
So let's go ahead and now let's
take a look at some getters, right?
What are some common getters that we have?
Well, we can clean this up quite a bit
where we actually no, I think about it.
We don't really need this, let's see,
we don't need number of restaurants
to live inside of this file.
This is something that makes sense to live
inside of the store, so let's move it.
So we're gonna go ahead and take that out.
Actually, let me just comment that out,
so I don't forget that I need to do that.
And then inside of here we can say
a number of restaurants, right?
And then this is where I have to
recall real quick this is pull up
the docs just to make
sure I do this right.
Because this is a discussion that's
worth having real quick, okay?
So something again that used to
happen in the past is that whenever
you would reference the state you
have to use it in a normal function.
You can use the arrow function
because you're relying on this, but
again in an effort to be a little
bit more modular as you can see.
Getters now can actually take an arrow
function where they automatically get past
the state as the first parameter.
So now that we know that,
we can basically then say, all right,
well this takes an argument of state and
what is it gonna do?
Is gonna do return, okay,
for now, this is actually,
I know why this is gonna be a problem,
but it's fine.
We're this gonna practice this
state.list.length, that's it.
And then if you wanna annotate it,
that's totally fine.
We just add the number onto the annotation
for the arrow function description.
Okay, that's taken care of.
And so this will be a little bit
tricky later, but it's fine.
We'll just crack on, and
then here's the thing.
Things like deleting a restaurant,
adding a restaurant.
How do we do this?
Well, these are things that really
belong inside, once again, the store.
This should be something that
we actually call an action for.
So how does that look like?
Well, in this particular case, again,
just to match up with documentation,
you'll see that it does something
a little bit differently.
Now is that because when you use this
syntax just like I was mentioning,
it actually needs to get the whole
instance of the store now.
We no longer can just get the state, and
this is kind of tricky when it
comes to auto completion and stuff.
But especially because of things like
asynchronous and that kind of thing.
Typically, when you're running actions
you're not gonna use an arrow function,
that's just general best practice.
But on the upside,
what this means though is that Eduardo and
the team who work on Pinia have made this
thing actually still have autocomplete
as you would expect when it comes
to typing and that kind of stuff.
So what we would do here is
we would basically say, okay,
so we have here that is
gonna get the payload.
And the payload is still gonna
be a restaurant, that's fine,
but then we can say
this.list.push payload.
We're not gonna worry
about that right now.
And then when we have delete restaurant,
similarly,
we'll get a payload of restaurant.
And then this.list = this.list,
.list.filter restaurant, great.
We'll just type that and
then there you go.
So 1, 2, 3.
So now we need to actually make sure
we call all of these things inside of
our page.
So I'm gonna go ahead and let me just,
I can just see the hide form is
still something that's important.
So this is where for example now, okay,
so we have inside of here addRestaurant.
So how do we do this?
So inside addRestaurant, you'll notice
that's being called right here,
and we know that we're
getting the payload.
So what we're going to do is we're
gonna still call this addRestaurant.
That's totally fine, but rather than
actually modifying it directly here,
all we need to do is call
restaurantStore.addRestaurant and
then drop in the payload.
Const save.
Why is it saying can't
find name addRestaurant?
Okay, [LAUGH] I think we're okay now,
that was super weird.
Yep, no errors being yelled at, great.
Okay, so we can test this out real
quick basically by going into our app,
refresh, much better okay
now when we hit new and
we do test.com I forgot to
hit the sign it there we go.
Now when we create it, there you go,
it is actually appearing as expected.
And so again,
I could walk through the rest of this but
I think the most important thing I wanna
show you here with the global store.
Is that it really doesn't look that
different from a regular component
instance, besides explicit keywords like
State is the data that you're gonna be
pulling from.
Getters is computed and then actions.
Like, this could easily be mapped
to what we learned earlier
today as far as like methods computed.
And state and then StateShape, data shape.
I think that's what's important to
realize with in this journey with you and
TypeScript, is that the goal is really
not to make you learn something brand new
in terms of syntax.
It should feel very familiar as you
are moving from thing to thing.